Replaced obsolete JEP-12 with JEP-12-01. (#138)
jmespath-unofficial/jmespath.jep: jep-012-01-raw-string-literals.md

# Raw String Literals

|||
|---|---
| **JEP**    | 12-01
| **Author** | Michael Downling, Maxime Labelle
| **Status** | accepted
| **Created**| 19-Nov-2022
| **Obsoletes**| [JEP-12](./jep-012-raw-string-literals.md)

## Abstract

This JEP proposes the following modifications to JMESPath in order to improve
the usability of the language and ease the implementation of parsers:

* Addition of a **raw string literal** to JMESPath that will allow expressions
to contain raw strings that are not mutated by JSON escape sequences (e.g.,

> “\\n”, “\\r”, “\\u005C”).

Reviewer: Should these be formatted as code literals?
```suggestion
`\n`, `\r`, `\u005C`).
```

Author: I expect those to be formatted as JSON strings.

Reviewer: "JSON string" seems like a heavily ambiguous concept (it could mean "_JSON text_", or "_JSON text expressing an instance of the string type, [which necessarily begins and ends with `"`]_", or "_an arbitrary sequence of code points represented by JSON text expressing an instance of the string type_"). But regardless, the distinction seems important here, and not currently clear. Perhaps something like this?
```md
* Addition to JMESPath of a **raw string literal** that treats `\` as a
literal character in most cases and in particular does not interpret JSON
escape sequences (and can therefore directly represent strings such as
“\\n”, “\\r”, and “\\u005C” without transformation).
```

Author: Indeed I later reverted to use curly quotes for an abstract string and only used double-quotes in this specific paragraph that mentions sample escape séquences.

* Deprecation of  the current literal parsing behavior that allows for unquoted
JSON strings to be parsed as JSON strings, removing an ambiguity in the
JMESPath grammar and helping to ensure consistency among implementations.

This proposal seeks to add the following syntax to JMESPath:

```
'foobar'
'foo\'bar'
`bar` -> Parse error/warning (implementation specific)
```

## Motivation

Raw string literals are provided in [various programming languages](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/String_literal#Raw_strings) in order to prevent
language specific interpretation (i.e., JSON parsing) and remove the need for
escaping, avoiding a common problem called [leaning toothpick syndrome (LTS)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leaning_toothpick_syndrome). Leaning toothpick
syndrome is an issue in which strings become unreadable due to excessive use of

> escape characters in order to avoid delimiter collision (e.g., `\\\\\\\\\\\\`).

Reviewer: You probably want to pull forward changes from https://github.com/jmespath-community/jmespath.spec/pull/140/files#diff-61454b0c01e81f0be5cfa14e8a86d2b73b7d3e79cba8a747a9c4e7621368370c .

Author: 👍

When evaluating a JMESPath expression, it is often necessary to utilize string
literals that are not extracted from the data being evaluated, but rather
statically part of the compiled JMESPath expression. String literals are useful
in many areas, but most notably when invoking functions or building up
multi-select lists and hashes.

The following expression returns the number of characters found in the string
`"foo"`. When parsing this expression, `` `"foo"` `` is parsed as a JSON value
which produces the string literal value of `foo`:

```
`"foo"`

> ```

Reviewer: `````suggestion
The following expression produces the three-character string “foo” using a `` `…` `` JSON text literal:

```
`"foo"`
```
`````

> The following expression is functionally equivalent. Notice that the quotes are
> elided from the JSON literal:
> 
> ```
> `foo`
> ```

Reviewer: `````suggestion
### Obsolete alternative

_This section recapitulates content from the original version of JEP-12 that is no longer accurate as of this replacement._

The following expression is functionally equivalent. Notice that the quotes are
elided from the JSON literal:

```
`foo`
```
`````

Author: Please, can you rephrase the `of of` as I do not know what you had in mind.

Reviewer: Done. It was intended to be "as of".

Author: Agreed. ✅

escape sequences, newline characters, and several other escape sequences
documented in RFC 4627 section 2.5.

For example, the use of an escaped unicode value `\\u002B` is expanded into
`+` in the following JMESPath expression:

```
`"foo\u002B"` -> "foo+"
```

You can escape escape sequences in JSON literals to prevent an escape sequence
from being expanded:

```
`"foo\\u002B"` -> "foo\u002B"
`foo\\u002B` -> "foo\u002B"
```

While this allows you to provide literal strings, it presents the following
problems:

1. Incurs an additional JSON parsing penalty.

2. Requires the cognitive overhead of escaping escape characters if you
actually want the data to be represented as it was literally provided
(which can lead to LTS). If the data being escaped was meant to be used
along with another language that uses `\\` as an escape character, then the
number of backslash characters doubles.

3. Introduces an ambiguous rule to the JMESPath grammar that requires a prose
based specification to resolve the ambiguity in parser implementations.

The relevant literal grammar rules are currently defined as follows:

```abnf

> literal = "`" json-value "`"

Reviewer: Hmm, this presents an interesting challenge because the actual current state of https://github.com/jmespath-community/jmespath.spec/blob/e1a690900a83f98f7caf42b71e87e1c082a42e74/GRAMMAR.ABNF has since diverged (including by adoption of JEP-12 itself). It might be better to instead introduce an entirely new JEP number (rather than JEP-12-01) that still obsoletes JEP-12 but applies against the current state rather than this historical one. It would therefore be quite small, just confirming the syntax and semantics of raw string literals (including our recent changes regarding control characters) but removing support for legacy unquoted backtick strings.

The idea should be that JEP-12 becomes interesting only for historical purposes and is not necessary for a correct implementation or comprehension of the spec, but the new JEP contains no history other than what is necessary to explain itself in the context of a specification that has already incorporated JEP-12.

Author: The _currently defined_ sentence implicitely refers to the *then current jmespath.org specification* at the time.
I think it’s better to improve the wording to that effect.

As explained in another issue, it appears that JEPs have not been authored chronologically and some have been authored retroactively, in an effort to document a trail of changes for historical reasons, much like this issue is trying to do for JEP-12.

Author: https://github.com/jmespath-community/jmespath.spec/pull/138/commits/da3a486a82bdafe97e3bdca63420b5ff56cb2980

> At the time of authoring the original version of this JEP, the relevant literal grammar rules were [then defined](https://github.com/jmespath-community/jmespath.py/commit/95a393e32e5aeb5f984cf2d7811fad75d4e0df95) as follows:

Reviewer: With the above section header, this can be restored.
```suggestion
The relevant literal grammar rules are currently defined as follows:
```

characters in a variable (let’s call it `$lexeme`).

3. Copy the contents of `$lexeme` to a temporary value in which all leading
and trailing whitespace is removed. Let’s call this `$temp` (this is
currently not documented but required in the
[JMESPath compliance tests](https://github.com/jmespath/jmespath.test/blob/c532a20e3bca635fb6ca248e5e955e1bd146a965/tests/syntax.json#L592-L606)).

4. If `$temp` can be parsed as valid JSON, then use the parsed result as the
value for the literal token.

5. If `$temp` cannot be parsed as valid JSON, then wrap the contents of
`$lexeme` in double quotes and parse the wrapped value as a JSON string,
making the following expressions equivalent: `` `foo` `` == `` `"foo"` ``, and
`` `[1, ]` `` == `` `"[1, ]"` ``.

It is reasonable to assume that the most common use case for a JSON literal in
a JMESPath expression is to provide a string value to a function argument or
to provide a literal string value to a value in a multi-select list or
multi-select hash. In order to make providing string values easier, it was
decided that JMESPath should allow the quotes around the string to be elided.

> This proposal posits that allowing quotes to be elided when parsing JSON
> literals should be deprecated in favor of adding a proper string literal rule
> to JMESPath.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal posits that allowing quotes to be elided when parsing JSON
literals should be prohibited in favor of the proper string literal syntax.
```

## Specification

> A raw string literal is value that begins and ends with a single quote, does
> not interpret escape characters, and may contain escaped single quotes to
> avoid delimiter collision.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A raw string literal is value that begins and ends with a single quote
and preserves embedded backslashes except those used to escape
backslash or single quote characters.
```

### Examples

Here are several examples of valid raw string literals and how they are
parsed:

> * A basic raw string literal, parsed as `foo bar`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A basic raw string literal representing the seven-character string “foo bar”:
```

```
'foo bar'
```

> * An escaped single quote, parsed as `foo'bar`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A raw string literal with an escaped single quote, representing the seven-character string “foo'bar”:
```

```
'foo\'bar'
```

> * An escaped backslash character, parsed as `foo\bar`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A raw string literal with an escaped backslash character, representing the seven-character string “foo\bar”:
```

```
'foo\\bar'
```

* A raw string literal that contains new lines:

```
'foo
bar
baz!'
```

> The above expression would be parsed as a string that contains new lines:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above expression represents the multi-line string:
```

```
foo
baz
bar!
```

* A raw string literal that contains escape characters,

> parsed as `foo\nbar`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A raw string literal with a non-special backslash character,
representing the eight-character string “foo\nbar”:
```

```
foo\nbar
```

### ABNF

The following ABNF grammar rules will be added, and is allowed anywhere an
expression is allowed:

```abnf
raw-string = "'" *raw-string-char "'"
raw-string-char = (%x00-26 /            ; ␀ - & precedes U+0027 "'" apostrophe
                    %x28-5B /           ; ( - [ precedes U+005C "\" reverse solidus
                    %x5D-10FFFF) /      ; ] - ... "]" and all following code points
                    preserved-escape /
                    raw-string-escape
preserved-escape = escape (
                    %x00-26 /           ;  ␀ - & precedes U+0027 "'" apostrophe
                    %x28-5B /           ; ( -[ precedes U+005C "\" reverse solidus
                    %x5D-10FFFF)        ; ] - ... "]" and all following code points
raw-string-escape = escape (
                    "'" /               ; \ apostrophe U+0027
                    escape)             ; \ reverse solidus U+005C

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
raw-string = "'" *raw-string-char "'"
raw-string-char = (%x00-26 /            ; ␀ through '&' (precedes U+0027 APOSTROPHE "'")
                    %x28-5B /           ; '(' through '[' (precedes U+005C REVERSE SOLIDUS '\')
                    %x5D-10FFFF) /      ; ']' and all following code points
                    preserved-escape /
                    raw-string-escape
preserved-escape = escape (
                    %x00-26 /           ;  ␀ through '&' (precedes U+0027 APOSTROPHE "'")
                    %x28-5B /           ; '(' through '[' (precedes U+005C REVERSE SOLIDUS '\')
                    %x5D-10FFFF)        ; ']' and all following code points
raw-string-escape = escape ("'" / escape)

```

```

> This rule allows any character inside of a raw string, including an escaped single quote or backslash.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This rule allows any character inside of a raw string,
including control characters and escaped single quotes or backslashes.
```

In addition to adding a `raw-string` rule, the `literal` rule in the ABNF
will be simplified to become:

```

> literal = "`" json-value "`"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
literal = "`" json-text "`"
```

```

## Impact

The impact to existing users of JMESPath is that the use of a JSON literal
in which the quotes are elided SHOULD be converted to use the string-literal
rule of the grammar. Whether or not this conversion is absolutely necessary

> will depend on the specific JMESPath implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The impact to existing users of JMESPath is that the use of a JSON literal
in which the quotes are elided MUST be quoted or converted to use the
raw-string rule of the grammar.
```

Implementations MAY choose to support the old syntax of allowing elided quotes
in JSON literal expressions. If an implementation chooses this approach, the
implementation SHOULD raise some kind of warning to the user to let them know
of the deprecation and possible incompatibility with other JMESPath

> implementations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

In order to support this type of variance in JMESPath implementations, all of
the JSON literal compliance test cases that involve elided quotes MUST be
removed, and test cases regarding failing on invalid unquoted JSON values MUST
not be allowed in the compliance test unless placed in a JEP 12 specific
test suite, allowing implementations that support elided quotes in JSON

> literals to filter out the JEP 12 specific test cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To accommodate legacy JMESPath implementations, all of
the JSON literal compliance test cases that involve elided quotes MUST be
removed, and test cases regarding failing on invalid unquoted JSON values MUST
not be allowed in the compliance test unless placed in a JEP 12 specific
test suite, allowing such implementations to filter them out.
```
